# Translators

Translators are packages that take a Python object (previously parsed from a YAML blueprint) 
and turn it into a Nacar application written in a target language such as Bash.  
Translators live in the `translate` package. Here you will also find an `itranslator.py` interface 
that defines the methods a translator should implement.  


## Structure
The files for each translator should live inside a package of their own under `translate`.
This package should follow the naming convention `to_<target-language>`.

For instance, the default Blueprint to Bash translator lives under `translate/to_bash/`. 
Within this package there is a `to_bash.py` module which is the translator's entrypoint. 
All the methods defined by `itranslator.py` must be implemented by this module.  

Additionally, there should exist a `templates` subdirectory (eg. `translate/to_bash/templates/`) 
which holds Jinja templates that will be populated by the translator to produce the
Nacar app in the target language. These are plaintext files that follow the naming convention
`<feature>.<target_lang_extension>.template` eg. `screen_flow.sh.template` for 
the template dealing with screen flow for a Bash Nacar app.  


## The `itranslator` interface

The most important method is `translate_blueprint()` which returns the body of 
the bash program as a string.  
`get_target_language()` must be defined and return a single option from the TargetLanguage enum.  

A compliant Translator comprises the following sections:

**<target_language> translator utilities**  
Return the target language of the Translator in question, used for introspection 
by the main loop.

**File heading**  
Get title, copyright, and info lines for the target Nacar app.

**Nacar app config**  
Nacar app settings (eg. screen width, title) used internally by the app itself, 
may be stored internally as constants in the output app code.

**Utilities**  
The code to create utilities for internal use by the target app. 
These may include methods to clear the screen, repeat a string, or set shell styles.

**Screen-building utilities**  
Methods called internally by the Nacar app to display screens in a composable manner.
There may be separate methods for drawing the top or bottom of screens, or display breadcrumbs.

**Screen flow**  
Set variables necessary for templates to create links between screens and the 
functions to navigate between them. Manage state variables holding the active 
screen or the current breadcrumb path. Dynamically define the input loop to listen for keystrokes.

**Screen rendering**  
Generate methods to show each screen as defined in the blueprint, invoke actions
when requested by the keystroke listener, and show the exit screen.

**Main loop**  
Show the relevant screen while an active screen is defined, handle behaviour on exit, and capture interrupts.

**Translate blueprint to <target_language>**  
A single method that brings together all the pieces performed by the above sections.

The implementations of these methods all end with a call to `set_template_data`, 
which will add the data generated by each method to an object that will be 
globally accessible in the template context (see below for details on the templating system).


## Templates

Each translator uses Jinja templates to construct the Nacar app that will be 
persisted to a file by the `file_io` module. These make use of standard templating 
features such as loops and variable interpolation to standardise the process of 
producing Nacar apps across target languages from different blueprints. 

A `template_data` object is available across a translator's scope, with each 
method in the `itranslator` interface generating and structuring data according 
to the YML blueprint before storing it in this object.  
`template_data` is then passed to Jinja's `render()`, which stitches all the 
templates together according to the outline in `base.<target_lang>.template` and 
uses `template_data` to generate the final Nacar app.  


## Separation of concerns

Do note that Translators are only responsible for building valid programs (as strings) 
in a target language from objects in memory. Actually persisting this program 
(eg. as a `.sh` file) is the responsibility of the main loop in `nacar.py`, which 
will write the translator's output to a file by handing it to the `file_io` module.  


---
Copyright 2022 Alberto Morón Hernández  
